#+author: George Kettleborough
#+hugo_draft: t
#+hugo_base_dir: ../
#+hugo_categories: life
#+hugo_paired_shortcodes: pictures

* TODO Norfolk Coast Path                             :walking:nationaltrail:
:PROPERTIES:
:EXPORT_FILE_NAME: norfolk-coast-path
:END:

The Norfolk Coast Path (NCP) is a waymarked, long-distance footpath and [[https://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/][National Trail]]
in England. It stretches from Hunstanton all the way along the Norfolk coastline to
Hopton. I walked it with my partner [[https://www.peregrinavicki.com/][Vicki]] over the course of seven days in
September 2022.

#+begin_pictures
ncp/DSC_1821|A view from a hill next to the sea with sea and houses visible.|The view from the Beaston bump.
ncp/DSC_1822
ncp/DSC_1826
ncp/DSC_1828
ncp/DSC_1831
ncp/DSC_1844
ncp/DSC_1847
#+end_pictures

** Planning

The NCP is around 135 km (83 miles) long and quite flat. The way is mostly good, well
trodden paths with some slower sections on sandy and shingle beaches (but you can often
choose to walk inland on firmer ground instead). Fortunately there are no major pebble
sections (unlike the walk to [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blakeney_Point][Blakeney Point]]).

There is only one section---the very last section between Gorleston and Hopton---that
*cannot be walked at high tide*. Other sections are not affected as the waymarkers will
take you away from any tidal sections. However, people can and do get caught out by the
incoming tide on the vast sandy beaches around Holkham and Wells (look out for the
amusing warning signs). It's probably not a problem when you're on the move, but don't
walk too far out if you're not sure.

At 135 km the NCP can be walked comfortably in 7 days. We walked it over the course of
two regular weekends and one three day long weekend. In terms of provisions the NCP is
split into two distinct halves.  Originally the NCP only ran from Hunstanton to
Cromer. This is the first four days' walking and is well provisioned in terms of shops,
transport and accommodation.  In 2016 it was extended from Cromer to Hopton. This part is
considerably more remote with very few options for accommodation and transport.

Starting from Hunstanton, the seven days end fairly evenly at towns and villages along
the way:
- Hunstanton
- Burnham Deepdale (20 km)
- Wells (17 km)
- Blakeney (12 km)
- Sheringham (16 km)
- Bacton (23 km)
- Hemsby (25 km)
- Hopton (20 km)

We weren't
able to find accommodation in all of these places and had to use public transport to
help.

For the first weekend we stayed overnight in a private room at [[https://deepdalecamping.co.uk/][Deepdale Backpackers]] in
Burnham Deepdale then took the [[https://www.lynxbus.co.uk/bus-routes/coastliner-36/][Coastliner]] bus back from Wells to Hunstanton.

On the second weekend we parked at Blakeney and caught the bus to Wells then walked back
to Blakeney. We were unable to find accommodation in Blakeney so drove to the [[https://www.yha.org.uk/hostel/yha-sheringham][YHA]] in
Sheringham. We then took the bus back to Blakeney and walked back to Sheringham.

The last three days really need to be done in one go as there are no buses at all on
this section. We parked in Norwich and took the train to Sheringham to start. There are
a few places to stay around Bacton but they are either ridiculously expensive or not
available when you want them. We ended up staying in the pub in North Walsham and had to
resort to a taxi to take us from/to the NCP at Bacton. Even the taxi was quite hard to
come by on the bank holiday weekend. In the second night we were able to stay in a
holiday home in Hemsby. This was by far the hardest bit to plan.

** Walking

*** Day 1: Hunstanton to Burnham Deepdale

The walk starts in the lovely seaside town of Hunstanton. The waymarkers take you on top
of the cliff away from the amusements and towards Old Hunstanton. We walked this way
because the tide was in but at low tide you can (and should) walk down to the beach and
walk that way to see the interesting and unique two-tone cliffs and, at very low tide, a
small shipwreck.

Depending on the time of day and year there might be crowds enjoying the sandy beaches
at Old Hunstanton. The NCP takes you away from the crowds, behind the chalets and
eventually into the dunes next to a golf course. We found ourselves walking through
waist high foliage and dodging brambles. Classic British walking, but probably the only
instance of this on the whole trail.

Before long the NCP meets the end of Peddar's Way, another National Trail in Norfolk. It
was at this point our route was diverted due to the boardwalk at Holme being closed for
repairs (and natterjack toads). The diversion took us inland up a considerable hill (for
Norfolk) with lovely views. Although that was nice, the way back down was a bit of a
trudge.

When we returned to the NCP proper the sandy beaches had given way to salt marshes. This
would be a familiar sight for the next few days. Much of the coastline here is
inaccessible due to mud and deep tidal inlets. The saltmarshes are a strange place. From
afar they look like land, but close up you realise they belong to the sea.

At Brancaster the walk follows a long boardwalk. This was in slight disrepair and there
were some signs suggesting we shouldn't walk that way. But the alternative was next to a
road, so we did and it was fine apart from the odd broken plank. After the boardwalk we
shortly arrived in Burnham Deepdale for the end of the day.

*** Day 2: Burnham Deepdale to Wells-next-the-Sea

Spoonbills?

The second day started with us walking right out to the saltmarshes, far away from the
villages. It was necessary for the path to dart back inland to cross the river Burn just
before Burnham Overy Staithe.

We started to notice the car of choice around these parts is a beastly Range Rover,
Porsche or even Rolls Royce. It turns out a lot of money has moved here given Burnham
Market its nickname: "Burnham Upmarket".

After the detour inland it was back out to sea and briefly back to sandy beaches. The
beach at Holkham and onwards to Wells is one of the most beautiful in Norfolk. At low
tide the sands seem endless. We walked partly out on the beach, looking for shells, and
partly inland a bit in the woods when the sand became too tiring.

The beach stops abruptly at Wells. You can swim over to the sand on the other side of an
inlet, but this is otherwise inaccessible due to the return of the salt marshes. From
the end of the beach it's a long walk back along the top of the sea wall to Wells.

Wells is another pretty seaside town and the end of our day. After a brief visit to the
souvenir shops we took the bus all the way back to Hunstanton. The bus ride back was
rather beautiful and provided a nice recap of the walk so far, in reverse.

*** Day 3: Wells-next-the-Sea to Blakeney

We started this day at the end---Blakeney---and caught the bus back to the start at
Wells. While waiting for the bus we visited Buoy Coffee which is, sadly, no longer
there, but served delicious coffee from Grey Seal Coffee in Cromer.



*** Day 4: Blakeney to Sheringham



*** Day 5: Sheringham to Bacton

Beaston Bump a notable hill.

*** Day 6: Bacton to Hemsby

*** Day 7: Hemsby to Hopton

** Reflection

* TODO Camino Gran Canaria                                   :walking:camino:

* TODO Camino Primitivo                                      :walking:camino:

* TODO Ben Eater Computer                    :projects:electronics:computers:

* DONE Building a Home Cinema on a Shoestring    :homecinema:audio:projector:
CLOSED: [2023-07-24 Mon 14:25]
:PROPERTIES:
:EXPORT_FILE_NAME: shoestring-home-cinema
:EXPORT_HUGO_CUSTOM_FRONT_MATTER: :description An opinionated guide to home cinema for the thrifty geek
:END:

** Introduction                                                      :ignore:

I love going to the cinema, but I've always been disappointed that I can't see older
films and I can't see them when it's convenient for me.  There have always been ways to
watch films at home, but even today when large screens and high-definition formats are
ubiquitous, it's just not the same as the cinema experience.  There's something
completely different about the big screen that a TV in a living room can't replicate.
For that reason I've wanted my own home cinema for as long as I can remember.  The
problem is I don't want to spend a lot of money on it.

The first iteration of my home cinema looked like this:

[[file:/cinema/cinema.jpeg]]

Home cinema has a strong overlap with the audiophile world.  You can spend as much as
you want on it, and there will always be more.  It's not that it's wrong to spend a lot
on it; there are real benefits to the latest, high-end gear.  But I think you can get
90% of the way there on about 10% of the budget, if that.  However, you might have to
make lifestyle sacrifices to save the most money.

This is my definition of a home cinema system.  It will be opinionated and I make no
apologies for that.  You can do things differently, but I think the following features
are non-negotiable:

- Big screen, at least 100" diagonal, filling your field of view,
- Full dynamic range, high quality audio,
- Highest quality media (usually blu-ray),
- Locally available; no streaming,
- Dark room.

A note before starting: this will also take some dedication.  It's a real project.
Saving money usually means building your own knowledge rather than paying for someone
else's.  But if you can get there, the results are thoroughly rewarding.

** Projector

Currently I think a projector is the only option.  You can get TVs up to 75" or so, but
that's not big enough and they are so unwieldy at that size you might as well get a
projector.

The best home cinema projectors are the JVC DLA series.  If you can stretch to a second
hand X500 or newer, it will be great.  The best value projectors are DLP projectors from
makes like Epson, JVC or Panasonic.  They are not as good as the JVC DLA projectors, and
suffer from "colour wheel" artifacts, but many people enjoy them.  Do not consider cheap
Chinese projectors on Amazon.  They are rubbish.  Buy second hand from a good make.

Be aware that projector bulbs have a finite life and are expensive.  If buying second
hand the seller should tell you the number of hours left on the bulb.  Factor in the
cost of a new bulb if you're not sure.  JVC bulbs can cost £300 new so really not cheap.

You need a screen.  Don't project on to the wall.  The screen is really important, but
you can start with a cheap Chinese one from Ebay.  I used a screen on a tripod because
it didn't need to be installed.  But better ones will need to be attached to a wall.

You don't need 4K, you don't need HDR, you don't need high frame rate.  A high quality
1080p projector at 24fps on a 120" screen is more than enough.  Luckily this also means
you don't have to worry about any HDMI standards etc.  You can just buy whatever is
cheapest.

** The Room

Possibly the most important part of all of this is the room.  First thing to get out of
the way: a home cinema is not a living room.  You won't just be able to plonk your
system down in the living room and call it a day.  This is where the real project is.
The rest is just buying equipment.

The ideal room is a squarish box shape with no windows.  If you do have windows, chimney
breasts, an L-shaped room etc. then it will make this more difficult, but you have to
work with what you have.  I wouldn't suggest acquiring a new space in a budget home
cinema guide.

If you /do/ need your room to double up as a living room then you need to consider ways
to convert it between these two very different purposes.  This is especially true if
live in a household that doesn't completely share your enthusiasm for the project.

Furniture can be just standard living room furniture.  A sofa is ideal.  It just needs
to be comfortable and oriented towards the screen.

Light control is extremely important for a projector to reach its potential.  You need
to block out external light sources but you also need to "deaden" the room as the
projector itself will cause ambient light in the room which will kill your contrast.  If
you have windows, blackout curtains are a must.  I bought full-length black blackout
curtains and attached them to the walls near the screen.  You can "open" the curtains if
you want to convert the room back into a living room.  A white ceiling is a
disadvantage.  Ideally it would be black.  But you can get away with just having
blacked-out walls.

** Sound

Good sound is just as important as a big screen.  What matters is good quality speakers
and amplifier and correct positioning of those speakers.  Do not consider anything with
Atmos or all-in-one kits that contain a handful of tiny little speakers.  Your budget
home cinema uses good old Dolby Digital and is at most a 5.1 set up.  Your equipment
will be mostly second hand.

You will upgrade your equipment in the following order:

*** Stereo set up

Start with a high quality stereo system.  You want speakers that can handle down to
about 60Hz or lower, if possible, and a stereo amplifier.

An amplifier with 30W per channel should be fine (higher is better, but no point going
above 80W per channel).  Look for Japanese brands like Pioneer, Marantz, Denon, Sony or
Technics.  Basic amps last for decades and are readily available for very little money.
As an example I bought a Pioneer A300X for about £50 without even trying to find a good
deal.

Bookshelf speakers are cheapest but you need to position them at around ear height
somehow.  A couple of pieces of furniture are fine.  Make sure you get hi-fi speakers,
not PA or monitor speakers.  Look up the frequency response and make sure it goes down
to around 60Hz.  Note that generally more capable speakers are physically larger and
heavier.

You need to position them correctly.  Basically you want a triangle with the speakers in
front and you in the middle.  Even a basic stereo system should sound a lot better than
any TV.

*** Environment

The environment needs to be quiet.  You don't want any sources of noise.  You also want
to be able to play sound loudly without fear of annoying neighbours etc.  This is so you
can enjoy sound with full dynamic range.

*** Subwoofer

Next you can add a subwoofer.  A good quality one from a make like SVS is worth it, but
they do hold their value pretty well, so you might need to allocate more funds then your
whole stereo set up.  Make sure the subwoofer supports both high level and low level
inputs.  The low level input is preferable, but you need an AVR for that, so for now you
will use the high level set up.

*** AVR

An AVR is a more advanced amp that will support multi-channel audio and digital inputs.
You can also plug your subwoofer in with the low level input which you definitely
should.  These don't hold their value well and as long as you get one without the latest
HDMI standard you can get one for 10% of its original value.

*** More speakers

If you get this far, you should first look into adding a centre speaker.  But you really
want it to match your front stereo speakers, so you might want to upgrade the whole set
of front speakers to matched set, called an LCR (left, centre, right). However, note
that the optimal position for the centre speakers is behind the screen and this suddenly
starts to cost a lot more money.

After that you can consider surround speakers, but these don't add that much so do not
consider them before doing the above. You can, however, consider them before a centre
speaker if you are the only one using the cinema, as the ghost centre of the stereo set
up should be good enough.

** Media

I use a NAS to store my media.  You can find an excellent video series by Jeff Geerling
outlining how to rip blu-ray media to a NAS, starting here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RZ8ijmy3qPo

You'll want to keep the NAS outside of your cinema as it will probably have spinning
media and be noisy.

I use Kodi on a Raspberry Pi in my cinema to play back the content from the NAS.  If you
don't have an AVR yet, you will need a USB analogue sound adaptor for it.  I recommend
the Behringer UCA202 which can be had new for around £20.  If you do have an AVR then
you don't need this as you will use audio passthrough via HDMI, but at £20 this is
probably cheaper to get started.

** Conclusion

If you stick to second hand stuff you can cobble together a great home cinema for less
than £2000.  It's still a lot of money and takes a lot of work and research, but it's a
great project.  If a partner exists, it helps a lot if they are understanding and have a
similar frugal mindset.  If you want this to look good in your living room, expect to
pay many times more and put in a lot more work.  Hopefully you don't have to.  Enjoy
your home cinema journey!

#  LocalWords:  waymarks waymark waymarkers waymarker
